[Music]
hi I'm Ted haftigabber founder and
producer of live talks Los Angeles
thanks for joining us
since we started over a decade ago we
have brought you hundreds of
conversations with storytellers writers
actors musicians humorists chefs and
thought leaders in business and science
you can watch and hear most of these in
our YouTube channel
and our podcast for details visit
livetalksla.org and now here's the show
you've tuned in to see
[Applause]
well Sid welcome to La well thank you
very much and congratulations on the
release of the book I told you before I
was flying the past two weekends and
it's everywhere in every airport
bookstore so
um good for airports
the book is the song of the cell
and I want to start with what a cell is
um a cell is
um
the least
or the smallest autonomous unit of life
you and I are made of cells
everything that's living is made of
cells it is the
single binding element
that runs through life maybe I'll say a
little bit more
so you know physicists always make fun
of biologists it's an old story
um and biologists eventually get tired
of it
um but
um
what's interesting about biology is that
there are three themes
that are sort of grand unifying themes
in biology
the first is evolution
evolution by natural selection
the second is the universality of the
genetic code that we share with bacteria
and elephants
and the third is cell theory
so
um most of these discoveries were made
by the 1950s so we're pretty happy we
found our Grand unified theory and the
physicists seem to be still searching
for it so um seems as if uh seems as if
one of the two camps has has has won the
game
take us into the deep past that you
start the book with
and
let's go to a time before we knew cells
existed
what were the prevailing theories of
Life at that juncture and what were some
of these signal moments in the discovery
of the cell
well the Deep post I mean you know the
question of what flesh is
and what flesh is made of is was of
course an ancient question
um people like Aristotle and others
battled with that question and and
thought a lot about it
um
the
and they thought it was continuous they
thought that you know we were slabs of
meat
um
and then
this was the theory for the longest time
and they would look at organs and they
were organs themselves were also
considered slabs of meat sitting inside
slabs of meat
um so there was a there was the idea
that it was all continuous it was just a
one big Continuum
um and the self the body was just a big
Continuum of of Flesh
creas as the Greeks might have put it
um
um and then all of a sudden
um comes this guy
uh Robert Hook
first
um now Hook's a strange character he's a
great
um
Cooks an incredible polymath
um he
um is an inventor he's an architect he's
a scientist he's a he works on mechanics
he works on Optics he makes telescopes
he makes microscopes he's just all you
know his intellect is just roving
um what's interesting about Hook is that
um
he I use this phrase in the book He's
he's intelligence is
phosphorescent and elastic like a rubber
band that glows as you stretch it
and there's a little bit of a pun here
because of course hooks hook invented
the laws of elasticity laws the laws are
named after him but anyway hook so so
hook
finds a microscope or creates a
microscope and he cuts
tissue with it and in a piece of cork
he cuts a piece of cork and he finds to
his amazement that cork is not just
again a slab of of of tree but in fact
is made of what he calls a great many
little boxes and he draws them and he
finds them
and he's he draws them but it's not
clear he pays a lot of attention to it
um
he's looking basically at cell walls and
and and and that's that's how he's he's
finding them
um
and then comes a little bit later comes
this other guy named Lewin hook uh who's
a Dutch Trader he's not a scientist not
trained in the language of science
doesn't have any formal training in
science and he wants a microscope
um to look at the quality of cloth
and uh because he's a he's a cloth
Merchant so he invents a different kind
of microscope he makes about 500 of them
he's very different from hook he's as I
said he's not trained as a scientist
he's secretive he's very reclusive and
he makes his microscope and looks at a
drop of water and in that drop of water
he finds these floating animal cues
um all over
all kinds of things probably protozoa
protests other organisms Etc and he's
totally shocked because you know people
have been looking through the telescope
and found massive universes and hook all
of a sudden sorry Lou and hook all of a
sudden begins to find these amazing
creatures floating in water and so he
begins to write about them and he writes
to the Royal Society and ironically Hook
is the president of the Royal Society so
hook
suddenly Lewin hawkenhook realized that
they've sort of stumbled on the same
idea that
living creatures
are are that they're living creatures
that are autonomous
in lewinhook's case single
celled single boxes and in hooks case uh
you know in a piece of cork made out of
thousands of of little boxes and
you have to imagine it's a shocking
right at that moment in time to look
through this microscope and see all
these tiny animals right so so I try to
build one uh in the middle of covid
um I tried to build one of these Lewin
Hawk a single Scopes and
I'm a terrible Builder but um
but I manage it eventually and
it's when you make one and you see one
and you see the first you put a droplet
of water on one end of it it's kind of
astonishing you hold you have to hold it
up to the sunlight
because there's really no source of
light in there it doesn't look like a
microscope it looks like something that
you know you would
find in a you know in an antique shop
but it's amazing you can see this whole
Tiny World
um in that in that in that microscope
and so these guys see in one case the
cork sells in another case these tiny
microbes
and then as you describe it significant
time goes by before others know what to
do with these observations and realize
that these are the basis of all life the
origin of south theory really is tell us
about how that transition occurred so
there's a there's sort of a gap in the
middle so now we're moving from the late
1600s early 1700s when hook and Lou and
hook are still looking down microscopes
but and and they're seeing the same
things over and over again they're
seeing you know these moving life forms
protists and other other life forms
um and then there's a sort of Gap in the
middle
um when my when microscopists and I name
a lot of them
um people you are you know people who
aren't sort of the big Canon of science
um they start looking at tissues
so not just at single protests or not
just at single celled animals but at at
real human tissues and they begin to
find once again that their cells
um
but
they don't make that final leap which is
the first tenet of cell theory and this
first tenet is that all organisms
plants animals every organism is a cell
or made up of cells
and that begins actually that begins the
book so there's an evening I'll take you
back sort of
um we only know this from from one
letter that survives but there's an
evening in Berlin
um when two
characters
um schleiden and Schwann a zoologist and
a botanist
um so they themselves are interesting
characters one of them has tried to
shoot himself
and he has a big scar he misses
thankfully so he has a big scar across
his face
and they're sitting in their lab mates
they work under Johannes Mueller so
they're sitting there
um thinking about sort of you know house
how how life is organized and
essentially through a convoluted series
of things they both realize that one of
them is studying plants one of them is
studying animals they both realize that
in in both animals and plants
the the formation of the organism is a
cellular formation they're formed by
through cells and so they make this very
bold claim that number one the cell is
the smallest unit autonomous living unit
and number two that all living creatures
are made out of cells again very bold
claims for their times and that lays the
basis for contemporary or modern cell
theory and it
invites the question of where do these
things come from right where do cells
come from so now
sliding and Schwann are students of
muellers
um
and Mueller and a lot of other people a
lot of other uh folks are sort of
transitional characters and by
transitional they are
um scientists in the modern sense but
they also inherit a lot of beliefs from
the past and one of the beliefs is that
cells crystallize out of vital fluids
um
and if you think about it I mean it's
not sort of a crazy absurd Theory and
because they see the birth of cells they
see the appearance of cells and the only
other thing that they've seen in the
past to some extent is when you take a
chemical
um you know you have a fluid and all of
a sudden crystals form spontaneously out
of the fluid so you could imagine you
know stop it's not so illogical to think
that out of vital fluid these cells
would suddenly Sprout and come across
and that leads us up to you know the
1800s when uh Rudolf workout the
pathologist
borrowing from previous
um
ideas in pathology makes the makes the
third claim and the third claim is that
all cells come from other cells
omnic cellular it's cellular now that's
an incredibly bold claim as well because
it says there's no vital fluid there's
no Crystal all of this stuff cells come
from cells that means that you and I
came had to come from the single cell
the zygote
so that's an incredibly important idea
I'll just extend that idea and then tell
you about workhouse second and third
postulates which will bring us up to
speed in terms of the fullness of cell
theory so think about this idea for a
second there are two things about that
idea that are very important number one
is that you and I come
from single cells that means that the
instructions to build you and to build
me must be in that single cell in fact
ironically it's the the sperm is the
smallest cell in the ovum is the largest
cell in the body and there's a reason
for that right the reason is that the
sperm is just a
carrier of of DNA there's no other
function it's it's basically DNA with a
big tail attached to it
and its job is to get to the the egg as
fast as possible the egg on the other
hand has to carry a lot of information
uh
epigenetic information so not just
genetic information information that is
beyond the genome and above the genome
so it has to have positional information
it has to know up from down otherwise
you would be upside down it has to know
left from right otherwise your heart
would be on the wrong side of your body
it has to know you know right uh North
East from Northwest uh otherwise you
know your body would be misassembled so
all that information is partially not
complete but partially located in the
egg so this idea of a ominous cellulite
cellular leads to the whole idea of
human and animal development how do you
develop from that single cell into an
organism and that's the basis of
Developmental biology and even today
we're finding out how that happens
one of the other things the egg has yeah
is the mitochondria yeah and that's one
of the organelles the so-called organs
of the cell in a sense that you walk us
through in a series of chapters yep tell
us about your favorite organelles and
why you love them so much
I don't ever ask me that before uh let
me see what's my favorite organelle I
mean people generally say you know
what's your favorite uh musician uh
uh but who's your favorite musician but
um my favorite organelle well you know
mitochondria have a big uh
have are a little bit of a uh an easy
answer because they are obviously so
vital to the uh to everything that that
happens in the cell and as you know
um
uh the theory of the origin of
mitochondria is very interesting and
that's why I love them so much
um so Lynn margulis
um who happened to be married at some
point of time to Carl Sagan so uh a
power couple
Lynn margulis was among the first to
propose that mitochondria arose
as a consequence of one cell swallowing
another cell
so the Mighty the mitochondria
themselves at some point of time were
cells that
were suddenly acquired not suddenly but
through Evolution acquired the capacity
to generate energy from uh metabolic
sources such as glucose
um and and generate energy in a way that
was very particular uh energy generate
energy using oxygen and glucose
um so
um that was called the endosymbiotic
hypothesis endosymbiotic meaning that
again the larger cell swallowed the
mitochondria and essentially the
mitochondria became symbiotic with the
with the larger cell and she was
considered a completely Crazy Character
ridiculed until now uh not on not now
but more recently we figured out that
this hypothesis endosymbiotic hypothesis
is absolutely correct
um mitochondria have their own genomes
which are quite different they resemble
bacterial genomes and we it's almost
certainly true that that's how they came
about through this ancient swallowing
probably about
two billion odd years ago this ancient
swallowing of one cell by another cell
and
that may be
significantly into the history of life
on Earth that that event occurred if we
go way back
to the first cell right you talk in the
book a little bit about the origin of
life in the first instance and then
later on you also talk about the origin
of multicellularity right and I wonder
if you could walk us through both of
those Mysteries and some of the
experimental work that people have done
to try and poke those right
so um I mean let's let's go to the
thought experiment which is very
interesting actually so
um if you were to take every single
living creature on the on the Earth
so you me the hundreds of millions
potentially billions of bacteria that
live within us the plant that you saw
outside the lizard that you saw before
that on the plant the bird that you
heard singing this morning the snail on
your in your garden
all of us if you rewind the biological
clock or the real clock time clock uh
100 years
500 years Thousand Years up to
three and a half to four billion years
ago came from one cell
so we all came from that one single cell
and if that cell had not divided life on
Earth it would not exist
that's called the
last Universal common ancestor we call
her Luca
um and
um she decided to divide and give rise
to all these cells now what do we know
about this first cell we know very
little because of course you can't
really rewind the clock you can only do
experiments
um we know that almost certainly
that cell
its information was not carried in DNA
but in RNA a molecule that's related to
DNA but it's a single strand not a
double strand not a double helix
um
and it had to have also a duplicator now
interestingly RNA can itself be a
self-duplicating molecule
um uh because it has can I said we don't
have self-duplicating rnas yet but
um but has properties that that can make
activities happen uh it's not just an
inner sort of strand of of uh it's just
not an inner molecule it's not an inert
strand
um so
either itself or with along with the
duplicator uh it had to be present
together but if they were just those two
things then they would potentially drift
apart and not be able to create a
metabolic milieu some something that was
contained so there had to be a membrane
and that membrane we know was likely
made out of fats
so a fatty membrane
RNA inside it and potentially a
duplicator with it itself or or
otherwise
and what's interesting is that you can
make these things these Proto cells in
the lab so Jackson stack and others have
shown that if that you can make these
membranes in the lab with just with with
fat with particular kinds of fat it's
not just any fat but a particular kind
of fat called a phospholipid and if you
keep adding more of these phospholipids
to it you can actually make these now
this is not life but this is just a
bubble you can make these bubbles grow
you can make an internal milieu Within
These Bubbles and if you keep adding
more and more they actually split and
become two
naturally just by energetics just by
thermodynamics they become two and then
the two becomes four and so forth so
we think that somewhere in that process
we we've captured the the protocell the
the first cell that that ever existed so
that was the first part of your question
the second part of your well
it should give you some chills of your
spine to know that
that all of us that the entire living
Kingdom came out of that one cell
division
you know three and a half billion and
just to be clear we have not been able
to replicate this I mean we've never
made life from not life correct we've
never made life from not life absolutely
correct we've only made the the closest
we've made is made artificial
genetic material put it into a living
organism and made
life
but we've made life from Life all cells
come from cells all cells come from
cells exactly except one cell
um so so there we have it now
now the second question is also very
interesting because you asked you know
what about why is it that
um
many celled organisms exist so first of
all if you realize that single-celled
organisms bacteria protests protozoa etc
etc are extraordinarily successful they
live in places that you and I could
barely imagine living in
thermal vents which are you know which
are really nearly boiling temperature
freezing cold
Tundra
you know toxic environments where you
and I would
die in seconds they colonize them and
live perfectly well in them so
single-celled animals or single-celled
bacteria sorry and other animals are
very very successful phenomenally
successful
um
so the question then arises well why
why did this why didn't why did why is
life not single-celled why is all of the
life not single cell and for a long time
biologists thought that it was a big
transition the transition from single
cells to multiple multicellularity
was a big transition
but it turns out that if you look
genetically and other with other pieces
of evidence it turns off it turns out
that there's a force
that's driving single cells to become
Cooperative units of multiple cells
and it happened not once but multiple
times independently in evolution there's
evidence to suggest that it happened
several times in evolution in other
words this drive was present several in
several instances
um you can replicate some of that in the
laboratory the book goes through in one
experiment where you you know a
researcher replicated this in laboratory
and we don't exactly know why why is it
that these single cells which were
incredibly successful want to congregate
and become multiple cells and there are
many ideas about it one idea is that
it's it's to escape predation it's to
escape being eaten up it's harder to eat
a big lob of cells rather than a single
cell another idea is specialization so
you can have one part of the cell be a
digestive unit another part of the cell
the a unit for movement yet another part
of the cell would be the metabolic
center of the cell etc etc etc such that
you can have cellular specialization
um yet another theory is that it gives
directionality to the cells such that it
can move towards food and move away from
predators and so forth but nonetheless
the drive to become multicellular was
was very strong and repeated over and
over in evolution and that too should be
a matter of great interest because you
can wonder why
and also there's some I think there's a
moral in there about
citizenship and citizenry
that somehow or the other
Evolution likes
um I don't want to put an
anthropomorphic
touch an evolution but the drive in
evolution and and natural selection is
towards citizenship
um it's important somehow well let's
Zoom way forward in the history of
evolution to us okay and
the sort of citizenship that you talk
about in the book that's going on among
our various cell types is so
extraordinary I think of my first
exposure to it as I started investing in
biotech and first learned about adaptive
immunity you go through the way that B
cells differentiate in response to
Invaders
tell us a little bit about that give us
a snapshot of how B cells work and then
maybe how T cells work a minute on each
it's a tall order so um B cells are are
fascinating
um
B cells are basically their job is to
produce antibodies antibodies are
missiles uh molecular missiles that
attach themselves to bacteria or germs
or viruses and neutralize them or
capture them so that they can be cleared
out by cells other cells in the body and
removed so they're missile producing
cells
and the way they make their missiles is
interesting they make their missiles by
basically shuffling genes around until
they have unique combination so every
single B cell is carrying a unique
missile and when it catches when that B
cell finds the cognate bacterium it
starts differentiating and becoming a
professional missile secreting
uh so
a T cell is very different T cells is
what I study quite a lot A T cell is not
a missile maker it goes there are two
there are two or three kinds of T cells
but one kind of T Cell uh the killer T
cell goes and
sniffs every cell in the body and asks
the question is there a virus inside you
um
or ask the question are you do you
belong to this body are you from
somewhere else
and it has specialized molecules to ask
that question and it asks the question
it goes around asking that question over
and over and over again and if it finds
that there's a virus inside you it has a
mechanism by which it'll kill that cell
if it finds that it's not part of your
own body again it has a mechanism to
kill that cell that's one kind of T Cell
so-called cd8 or killer cell
um the other kind of T cell is called a
helper cell or although as I said
calling it a helper cell is calling
Thomas Cromwell a bureaucrat
um because it's it's an incredible cell
so that's called a CD4 cell
um and anyone who knows about sort of
Popular Science and popular literature
knows that C4 cells is what HIV infects
and if the CD4 cell collapses or the CD4
cell count collapses then you get AIDS
and so it's incredibly important because
the CD4 cell the CD4 T Cell doesn't go
around sniffing it goes around
coordinating the entire immune response
making B cells talk to T cells making B
and T cells talk to other immune cells
and therefore coordinating sort of
machinating the entire immune response
and so that is one example of this
extraordinary complexity in just one or
two cell types is the same story across
all of the cell types and you go through
a few examples of the cells that make up
specific organs nephrons hepatocytes and
so forth and each of them is a
compelling tail in its own right but
where you begin the book is with this
description of Emily Whitehead it's one
of the first vignettes and it speaks to
now this new actor in this incredibly
complex ecology which is us and our
technology and it appears that we are at
the verge of a major transition in
history where we're not merely the
output of the psychology but are
starting to play a role in how it works
and so could you tell us about what
Emily Whitehead benefited from and how
Technologies like it are now reshaping
what it means to be human
so so the book has a provocative
subtitle if there is the subtitle part
of the subtitle is the new human
um and so the question is who is the new
human
and I make it very clear that you know
we've gotten used to partly because of
popular
sci-fi
the new human being sort of like an
infrared equipped uh
you know prosthetically enhanced uh
creature what I say you know what I call
Keanu Reeves in a black MooMoo
um uh sort of a matrix character
um but in fact walking amongst us
um in this Auditorium there are people
who've had a bone marrow transplant
um their blood system is not theirs
they're actually a chimera their blood
system comes from someone else
um there are people who will soon be
walking amongst us maybe already walking
amongst us who have electrodes inserted
to stimulate certain cells in their
brain so that they can get relief from
diseases such as Parkinson's or maybe
recalcitin depression
um there are people in which in whom we
are transplanting genetically engineered
cells and that's brings us to Emily
whiteheads Emily Whitehead had very
lethal
form of cancer that relapsed
um called acute lymphoblastic leukemia
her chances of survival without any
therapy was zero percent so she was
basically given up for dead
um and she got a transplant she was
transplanted T cells were extracted from
her body genetically engineered to
attack the cancer
um and remember T cells usually go
sniffing around to ask the question are
you foreign or are you not foreign so
basically this T Cell was engineered to
recognize the cancer as foreign and then
re grown in a laboratory
um stored half of it was stored in a big
vat which happens to be called Krusty
the Clown
and half of it was returned to her body
and that those cells became expanded
became highly active almost killed her
in their
mad Glee to kill cancer cells but they
killed the cancer and Emily is still
alive so this was when she was seven she
is now 17 and applying for college and
has been cancer-free so really an
incredible Miracle of of Science and uh
we did a a lovely segment on CBS last
week with her
um and I you know I've been friends with
the family for years and I would
encourage people to watch it it's one of
these stories that really restores some
faith in
in in what science can achieve and can
do
um if it's applied in the right
direction
I think that friendship you mentioned
with her and her family uh is emblematic
of a broader observation that I would
have from the book which is the
you love the science but you love the
people
you love the patience you love the other
researchers with whom you've
collaborated or marveled at the
discoveries of in history
and I want to know
what it is that captivates you about
those people on both sides of the
equation the inventors and the
beneficiaries
um
like telling stories
um I think telling stories is very
important
I think telling the stories of of people
is very important taking them to the
right place I often
go to places to just visit them to be
there
um you know I went to for the gene I
went to
um
Mendel's monastery
um and I'll tell you a funny story about
that in a second
um but but
I I like this I like their stories
um
in a sense this book is
sort of an extended Love Letter to them
there was a love lovely review today
um which I couldn't read because it was
uh it was uh fire World
um but
um but it started with saying that this
book is a love letter to a cell
uh which I thought was it's a lovely
idea but it's also a love letter to all
these people to all the people the
inventors the
the patients
um the teachers the nurses the the
doctors
um everyone
um so so I think it it's it comes from
from from from a love of Storytelling
now going back to Mendel just to finish
up that little story so I went to the
Mendel's Monastery these days is not
particularly easy to get to you have to
uh it's in a town called Bruno
um which is in the middle of the the
Czech Republic
um it used to be a big town but it's now
becoming a kind of a dwindling
um
central European town
um so anyway so I took a train from
landed in Vienna I took a train from
Vienna landed up in Mendel's Monastery
it's very hard to communicate blah blah
blah and landed up and there was a woman
and she said but it's closed
um and I said but you don't understand
I've come from you know thousands of
miles uh to come and just look at
Mendel's Monastery and she said it's
closed and there's nothing to see
um but I said that's okay I just just
want to be inside and she said okay well
you have to apply
um to get in
um in triplicate
and I said okay I'm from India I know
how to play this game
I said I
stood before I said I hereby apply in
triplicate
and she was like okay now you've beaten
me at your game
and so she let me in
um so that was my trip to Mendel's
monastery
it's clear that you like
Heretics
and that's a Common Thread through these
inventors even people like Lewin hook
who didn't know he was an inventor
necessarily or maybe thought he was the
greatest inventor but
they all
rebelled against some incumbent wisdom
that proliferated at their moment and
I'm curious
what you think the Heretics of today are
pushing against what I mean we're almost
certainly wrong about some significant
orthodoxies in medicine or cellular
biology what do you think might be
candidates so I'd be I'm careful about
Heretics
um and I want to make a very important
distinction here which we can talk about
um it'll take us the entire evening to
talk about it so I'll I'll give you I'll
plant the idea in your in your head
I make a strong bright line distinction
between disease and desire
um diseases linked to suffering
and it is about suffering and we
recognize it as something that's linked
to suffering
desire is linked to enhancement or
augmentation and the desire to become
something else taller
bigger I don't know having another some
other qualities that we don't have
um
they're different things
and the the lines between them are
generally generally bright lines because
of again because we recognize suffering
but but I think that those lines are
changing so I think there are Heretics
who
move in the direction of desire and I
think they're problematic Heretics so I
describe of course in a chapter called
the tampered cell I describe
uh this uh the the Chinese scientists
who started making genetically
engineered babies without informed
consent without
uh telling the scientific community and
really created a Ruckus In in the world
of science
um and then there are people who treat
disease and are are also Heretics
um
or people who make inventions that
eventually will be used to create
disease or to cure diseases who are also
Heretics so I make a strong distinction
between between people who fall on
Heretics who fall on one side and
Heretics Who falls on the other now your
question is about Heretics that about
heresies and cell biology that we yet
don't recognize
um and of course if we don't yet
recognize them how would I know but uh
but I can make some guesses
um I think we
then the reason that this book is called
the song of the cell
is that there's a
there's a there's a movement at the end
of the book
um there's a story which I tell which is
of a professor of Botany who goes to the
rainforest
um and he takes a local kid into the
rainforest with him and
the professor botany is amazed because
this this kid can name every plant
um
and he goes goes after every plant and
names every plant and the professor
botany says well that's amazing you can
name every one of these hundreds of
plants that are around but the but the
young kid is dejected he said you know I
know that I know the plants and this is
from amitab gosh's book but I don't know
the songs between them
um and he interestingly means it quite
literally he really doesn't what he's
saying is he doesn't understand the
interactions that occur between the
plants and perhaps the the the birds
that sit on the plants and the insects
that feed on the plants Etc et cetera
the entire complex ecosystem so I think
the new Heretics of today are going to
solve the problem of how these Cellular
Systems are not just
not are not don't just sit in isolation
but in fact talk to each other and we've
already started seeing some of this
we've learned now that this gut brain
axis for instance is becoming very
important somehow or the other
um our anticipation for instance of
sugar already triggers a series of
activities in our brain which then feed
back into
um into our intestines so I think those
kind of long-range or short-range
interactions between cells is is one of
the one of the things that I think is
going to really Empower our
understanding of the not just the song
of the cell but the songs of many cells
does this connect to what I would call a
nerd bomb that you drop in the book when
you say sequencing is seduction
what does that mean what are you what
are you fighting against there
so it's it's it's a little bit of uh
it's a bit of a nerd bomb except for the
fact that there's a long
passage that that
precedes it
um
so
there is there was this
idea that after we sequence started
sequencing the human genome and
sequenced then started sequencing cancer
genomes that all of a sudden all these
cures for cancer would just fall out of
that process that basically that we
would find the answers to you know we
would sequence a cancer find a matched
medicine for that and that would be the
way that we would move forward
and that has been an incredibly sobering
experience that is aside from a few
examples that has not worked out to be
the case
um and that's been very humbling for
people who were big Advocates of this
Theory
um
and it was a very seductive Theory you
know cancer is a genetic disease if you
sequence the Genome of genomes of cancer
we would find the mutations the
mutations would lead us to drugs then
the drugs would cure the cancer right
sounds like a wonderful Theory but that
was all seduction
we are the
in trials in real human experience that
has not turned out to be the case what
has turned out to be the case is that
understanding the cell biology of cancer
understanding the cancer as a cell not
living in a vacuum but living in a
particular home
metastasizing to particular places
creating particular ways or metabolizing
particular nutrients and depending on
particular circumstances create
vulnerabilities for that cancer and it's
only by understanding the cell biology
of that cancer that we can unveil those
vulnerabilities and use them to make new
drugs like immune therapies or in Emily
Whitehead's case genetic genetically
modified cells cellular therapies that
will kill the cancer cell
so not nerd bomb yeah corrected
would I take that response to mean is
that you think the secret to cancer in a
sense is in that song
yes I do think the secret to cancer is
in that song it is in the
interactions that it's in the cancer
cell but it's in within the cancer cell
it's in the interactions of the many
parts of the cancer cell that we don't
fully understand and outside the cancer
cell it is the interactions of the
cancer cell with the immune system with
the blood system with its local
neighbors and and so many other
parameters that we don't fully
understand that if we did understand we
would be able to direct direct and are
directing new therapies against this for
example as I said new immune therapies
new therapies just stop the cancer the
cancer from pulling out blood vessels
and feeding itself you and I have been
talking about you know my interest in
the in the metabolism of cancer the fact
that cancer metabolizes things
differently makes uh different you know
uses uh attaches different sugars to
different proteins than than normal
cells and so forth so inside the cancer
cell and outside the cancer cell the
sort of malignant song of the cancer
cell is something we need to understand
before we start you know going down this
route of sequencing which is very
seductive
so before we open it up to questions I
don't know how we are on time but
that'll that'll tell us
I want to
understand
the connection between everything we've
just talked about
this story of cellular biology that you
masterfully illustrate in the book and
the metaphysics that you hint at
periodically I mean you bring Aristotle
into this you bring Hinduism into this
periodically in the book
for you as not just a scientist and a
clinician but as an artist in your own
right
where is the soul in this work for you
I mean this this is a very unusual book
because this uh book is
um written as a series of almost you can
think of this unlike Emperor or unlike
the gene you can think of this book as a
series of short stories
and a series of Love Letters to
individual cells it's it's a it's a
Slightly bizarre organization but one
I've I've sort of learned to love this
book was very hard to write because when
you write a book uh chronology is your
friend
so you write a timeline and you say I'm
going to start at the end sorry start at
the beginning because start at the end
actually if you wanted to
that would make you a different kind of
writer but
um you could you start at the beginning
ended the end and that's how you write a
book but the problem is that
cells are so unique
and so different
um
and there is no you know if you made
this if you follow the chronology you'd
have to go into a thousand different
ways you know people were exploring the
brain while they were exploring the
kidney people were exploring the heart
while they were exploring the so you'd
have to somehow figure out a way so
instead
each chapter becomes a short story or as
this reviewer put it each chapter
becomes a love letter to a particular
cell so there's a love letter to the
pancreatic cell and one to the T cell
and one to the B cell and one to all
these other cell types so this book is
organized as a series of of stories and
the soul of this book I think is exactly
as I said is this this my
my decades-long love affair with with
cells
why don't we pause there and open it up
great if you have a question please
raise your hand and I'll bring the
microphone to you just a quick reminder
around here questions typically begin
with a W or an H
they are generally short there is no
such thing as a two-part question and
tonight only D.A Wallach gets to ask the
follow-up questions
who would like to go first
if these cells can live anywhere any
harsh environment in the world do you
think there is a cell life on other
planets in our solar system
well I mean numerically or theoretically
just given the number of
um
exoplanets which resemble
the circumstances of the Earth
just numerically it would be
unsurprising to me if there was not uh
another cell type
in another planet
just just by numbers
um
it would be a little bit surprising will
we ever find one
um probably not
uh just because they're so far away
um
if they've
somehow managed to send out signals
maybe we'll find the signal but will we
ever meet one I don't think so just
because everything is so far away that
it would take us
time Beyond time to get there now there
are there is a theory which I don't
subscribe to but there's a theory that
that the the origin of the cellular
Universe in on Earth was it is actually
from Mars which cooled down before the
Earth
um and then became colder and colder and
colder but cool down before the Earth
and some piece of it was knocked off and
landed on the earth with cellular life
in it
um but Mars then became colder and
colder and colder and colder such that
it could itself no longer sustain
cellular life but it Earth can
um I don't know if that's that I'm not
the biggest believer in that theory it's
it's just kind of a just so story that
is very hard to prove or disprove
certainly we haven't found any evidence
for any of this
um but again numerically speaking I
think it would be hard to imagine that
there wasn't cellular life in other
planets what it looks like I can't tell
you what it breeds what it how it
metabolizes I can't tell you any of this
is there a chance we'll ever meet it
probably not
I have a follow-up yeah
not a joke
if as you contend in the latest nerd
bomb that you dropped there are aliens
yes just to be clear about the answer
that question you said there are
definitely aliens
do you would you assume that aliens also
have cancer
um yeah so that's another very good
question
um
I think that the laws of evolution
[Music]
um some kind of
organization whether it's cellular or
not I can't imagine a non-cellular
organization but I I suppose there could
be other mechanisms of organizing uh
tissues and and structures
um and I can't say anything about
genetics because it's impossible to
extrapolate about
why or how the you know the universality
of the genetic code is really a
consequence of of evolution
um so it really leaves us with Evolution
and cell theory so
um the the quick answer is
cancer
um and wrap your brains around this but
it is interesting
cancer is the one disease
which
distorts and exploits all three of the
fundamental
pillars of life so it's an evolutionary
disease so it evolves
and that that's what makes it very hard
to
um kill
it's a cell biological disease it uses
the cellular physiology it distorts it
and it is a genetic disease it uses it
Alters as genetic code so
a in a bizarre way it's the only disease
that takes the three fundamental pieces
of
human
of all life
and twists them
around and Twirls them to its own
advantage and it's the only disease that
I know of that does you know takes all
three of them
and so so if that's the case I would
imagine
that aliens also get cancer uh along
with dreaming of Electric Sheep
fair enough
next question how do scientists explain
why the therapy worked on Emily but
perhaps not another young lady
yeah so we've
um we've been looking very
um hard at why
um it works for Emily and and not for
everyone
um generally speaking it's pretty
successful
um so the success rates for cd19 which
is what Emily was treated with cd19 car
T therapy is now hovering around 70 to
80 percent
um so these are very difficult cases
right so remember these are cases that
are relapsed after usually two years of
chemotherapy
um there's a 90 80 90 cure rate for this
with chemo alone
um and so Emily happened to fall on the
10 15 that was relapse refractory in
that relapse refractory population about
um 70 of patients will be maybe 80 of
the patients would be cured with cd19
therapy now what's interesting about it
is that
um for some people it doesn't work
because the cancer cells basically
evolve and mutate and Chuck away the the
very recognition system that allows
um
them to the T cells to recognize them so
they basically chop off
the the piece that allows the T cells to
recognize them so that's one very common
mechanism of escape and then you can't
use cd19 anymore
so that's the understandable piece
but there are some relapses I just
actually saw one but there's some
relapses that are cd19 positive
that still have the whole protein in
them but for some reason or the other
that we don't understand
um are escaping the T Cell response
um and and and and they're they're
really mysterious ones um I just saw
what actually bizarrely enough
um a patient with
um cd19 positive cells got cd19 therapy
got a car T Cell directed against that
We examined had a relapse uh fluoride
relapse We examined ourselves they still
have cd19 on them so thankfully she had
a second dose so we always make two
doses
um so she had a second dose she's
getting a retreatment because he
qualifies for retreatment
and so we're hoping you know with the
with the second treatment that we will
get get get the to get those cd19 cells
but there's some mystery there that we
haven't yet solved
do you think we will see human
immortality In Our Lifetime or is it as
you say like another seductive idea
um it depends on what you I mean you
know I suppose it's quite clear what
immortality is
um
I think we'll see some variant of soft
immortality
um I have an essay that I'm sort of
working on which no one seems to like
um but um
but it's a thought experiment and I
thought let me let me let me suggest it
to you
um this were fun so my thought
experiment is the following you see data
Gathering
and data collection
has and data storage has become so
inexpensive that we can essentially
store infinite amounts of it
um
so
that just just let's remove that as a as
a consequence or a variable
now
imagine that you clone yourself which is
lies within the reach of biology so
human cloning is there's no fundamental
barrier against or that prevents us from
cloning humans there are practical ones
but there's nothing in biology that says
you can't make an exact copy of yourself
so imagine that you clone yourself
and you take you download
using perhaps very
uh you know nothing no fancy tools so no
cybernetic inserts into your brain but
just play a movie of your life every
let's say every 20 minutes of your life
every 40 minutes of your life or maybe
it's on continuous role as you move
through your life this clone
so you have
a genetically identical
human
who is on continuous data
playing back your life as you lived it
um
that clone also has his or her own free
will so they might decide to stop the
movie at some point of time but let's
say they don't stop the movie but in
fact assimilate the movie somehow
um
that's
um a kind of chilling immortality
um
but I suspect that that some people
might want to try it out
um
I'm not for it
I'm just it's a thought experiment
um let's try it why not exactly I'm not
going to try it but it's a thought it's
a thought experiment but if you mean in
the formal sense will we see human
immortality in our lifetimes I think the
answer is no yes right in front
based on all of your experience and also
from writing the book do you think
cancer will ever be cured
so I think some cancers are already
being cured
um uh I gave you the example of of Emily
Whitehead we're now reaching almost uh
you know
95 97 cures for acute lymphoblastic
leukemia
um I think will cure we're certainly
curing many other leukemias and
lymphomas
in our lifetime I think we will see the
cures of at least five or six more
cancers
um
obviously we'd like to prevent them
and I think what's interesting is that
the amount of work that's gone into
curing cancers is disproportionate to
the amount of research and work that's
gone into preventing cancers
um
and part of the reason is is not just
it's not machinate it's not a
machination it's just that we haven't
really
found
I would say profound ways of preventing
cancer
um we know how cancers arise
certainly we found ways of preventing
viral cancers
cervical cancer has a vaccine against it
it's caused by a virus called human
papilloma virus there are other cancers
that are caused by viruses we can
prevent those either through
transmission or others
but I think that
um we've
and this is a surprising fact to me
certainly since the 19 it's been really
about 20 maybe maybe coming up to about
50 years
since we found I mean and I'm going to
use my words very carefully here a major
preventable human carcinogen
and that last one was smoking
um we found lots of carcinogens
but they aren't major in the sense their
impact on human populations isn't huge
or they are not preventable
aging is a carcinogen of sorts it's not
a preventable one we'd like to age
um and so
um the last one we've found is not even
you know it is sort of is a squiggly one
which is obesity
um and its connection with cancer is
really quite unclear so
um
what I would love to do is
to explore now with new molecular tools
that we have and new epidemiological
tools and new computational tools that
we have
to really figure out ways to delay
um and thereby prevent
cancers arising In Our Lifetime while we
concentrate on cures and I think if we
do that I think we we we will make a lot
of progress
um and it's not going to be you know eat
more Goji berries it's going to be
something about some marker that you
have a genetic risk that you have that
we can actually and their sequencing is
not seduction
um a genetic risk that you carry
um
probably not in one gene but maybe a
combination of 150 genes
stratify People based on that risk and
assess those people using you know
whatever that risk is try to find
mechanisms to prevent those or detect
those particular cancers
now I say this all this with a little
grain of of of
um I of Terror in fact I I would
encourage you to read a piece that I
wrote for the it's in the Wall Street
Journal um called Welcome to cancer land
or something like that and forget the
title
um
because it essentially makes everyone a
patient
you assess a risk
and since cancer is such a prevalent
disease
and a decision we need to take make as a
society is if that's the kind of society
that we really want to be in in which
you are always being assessed for risk
and your life lives in the shadow of
risk and this may be not just for cancer
but for other diseases as well
um and I've written about it I've
written about it in a way that I I hope
um provoke some thinking about what it
would mean to enter this kind of world
of risk
um there's a there's a very chilling uh
word that patients with breast cancer or
the bracha one gene use they call
themselves pre-vivers a pre-viver is a
survivor of a disease you haven't yet
had
it's a very bizarre word it's a Kafka s
word
um
inventing a world of pre-vivers not just
of cancer but of all other diseases
would be very distorting for
Society it would create a perpetually
anxious
uh Society so
it is not clear to me how and whether we
should and we should dip our toes in
that world or not I know I gave you a
very complicated answer to your very
very simple question
said I want to ask you a total
non-sequitur question okay
I believe it was a piece in the New York
Times of the New Yorker one of your
fancy New York Publications that
followed you in a day of the life
I don't know if you remember this okay
it's like so what does Sid and his
family do on a Saturday right and you
did all of these very
sophisticated things you went to the
museums you went to the bookstore you
cooked
and then the other sophisticated cooking
and sophisticated okay for me in the
afternoon you did something shocking
which was you your wife and your
children
read for two hours something like that
I've got a two-year-old
and I'm curious
how you created that discipline that
monster yeah I mean how
truly how do you get kids do you know
we brought up I have to say we brought
up two readers uh
and they're real readers
um I I come back it's it's kind of
amazing they are real I have two
daughters and they are real readers I
mean she'll come to the my older one my
older daughter in particular who's 17
will come to the dinner table and I'll
say you know you know I just was reading
this piece or I'll reading this thing by
I don't know someone
um
uh Jenny Egan or zadie Smith or someone
and she'll say oh I've read that
um
and I'll tell what do you think about it
and she'll go on to tell me what she
thinks about it
um and she's
prolific and she reads everything now
the question is how or why I think it's
because
I think you make a reader not by Never
by telling anyone to read anything I've
never seen anyone become a reader by
being told to be a reader uh it's like
cats
um
the only way they became readers is
because we were readers
um and how is it like cats it's like
cats because when you tell them to tell
them to do something they do the office
okay got it okay
um but I I think the way you bring up a
reader is by reading
that's the only way you can do it
um was there a moment where you were
reading and they weren't reading and
um I don't remember I mean I think you
know that's actually what's funny about
is that I we didn't even particularly
read to them we just read our own books
right
uh selfishly
um it wasn't as if you know we said oh
you know look how fun it is to read and
then they started reading and no we just
said
um you know it's an afternoon how nice
it would be to read my own book and you
go and do your own thing and eventually
I think they just got tired of of Roblox
and yeah and said you know actually
the world of imagination that reading
brings is more interesting uh than than
putting blocks on top of blocks
um and they started reading I I can't
tell you the secret all I can tell you
is that I brought up two incredible
readers
next question
maybe we have I don't know Ted how many
soup
s but science has taken a huge hit in
the last four or five years for that's a
good way to ask the question for very
many reasons and I'm just wondering how
do you
keep the faith in mankind like you keep
your faith in
cellular science or biology or you know
whatever
um
knowing that we could just as easily end
ourselves
you know
um I big scale little scale
how do you keep that positive you know
Faith going when somebody says to you oh
I don't believe in science hmm
well I think that the the answer it lies
in the fact that um
generally speaking
um
people who don't believe in science
when they encounter
um
adversity
such as the adversities that are
coming with climate change or the
adversities that come with personal
medical issues the adversities that come
with
um
changes in in lifestyle and behavior
um they they reach a kind of mental
compromise
in which they begin to understand
that that there is value in medicine
um
I'm a doctor so and so it's going to be
a doctorally answer
I I think that that they may that that
people make a compromise
um and they say I'll believe a little
bit of science
um when they face these adversities and
they're coming all the time
yeah
yes yeah I mean you know look you're not
gonna
you're certainly not gonna get the
answer from me that you know I'm totally
sanguine about about what's happening in
in in the United States and the world
right now I'm not I'm not sanguine about
it at all
um but I do think that that
um
that
medicine is a good thing I think that
the intense bravery of
um Physicians and more than Physicians
really nurses
um was grotesquely under recognized uh
during the covet pandemic
um and for political reasons
um
I would have made last year national
nurses you're the nurse
um
I would have you know there was
something very moving every evening uh
in New York at six o'clock people would
open their windows and bang uh their
pots uh to applaud
um the nurses and doctors who were
sitting in the front lines with full
Dane with full knowledge that they would
get covered and might die from covet
there was something very moving about
that I'm saying this not because as I
said I'm I'm not sanguine about the
world
but I'm also saying this
um because I think that
um I suspect that some of these will
stay people who are deniers our deniers
but I think some of some people will
convert over their lifetimes as they
face
personal adversities that come with that
come naturally
um and they'll create a kind of soft
compromise
but that said you know
the the the mental and physical toll
that covet has taken
um particularly on the medical community
the burnout that we've seen
um among doctors
um really needs to be addressed and it's
making it a it a political issue
um and denying it is is just really
grotesque
um I'm sorry to say
and our final question for the evening
back on the cell you mentioned it we
thought it was rare that a single cell
could be multi-cell but it turns out
that it's happened more than once and
many times throughout history it's
proven to be it seems
incredibly rare that we had in original
cell a single cell kind of come out of
who knows where
and we're looking on other planets maybe
that happened can we be looking on our
own planet is it possible that we will
be able to create
like a separate track that you said
we've never made life except from former
life but is anyone working on this is it
an interesting problem to solve
do we even know where to look how did it
happen in the first instance
um yeah so lots of people are working on
it um I gave give some examples in the
book of people working on it which which
are fascinating
um people are working on on
duplicator molecules
um self-duplicating molecules
people are working on self-duplicating
or dividing membranes so all of that
absolutely has been worked on
um
the the the the the the the problem is
that
[Music]
um
um I think that
these it's it depends on what what the
purpose is
um if the purpose is to satisfy Natural
Curiosity I think it's perfectly
reasonable to try to make a a new kind
of cell uh from scratch so life not out
of life so-called abiogenesis in the
fancy words of
um of of of biology
um
but if the purpose is to manipulate life
to make it do things that it hasn't done
before or can't do before which is a
much more engineering like purpose so
for instance to eat up
um leaked oil in the ocean
um then you're probably better off
starting with life and re-engineering
life because it's a much easier thing to
do so it really depends on where what
the purpose is what question you want to
ask
um if the because it seems to me that
that the amount of manipulation that you
can do with life itself simple forms of
life starting with those simple forms of
life injecting for instance a totally
new genetic code into a simple form of
life
is very powerful the synthetic biology
universe is is very powerful these days
um so I think there's a there's a lot
there
but if you want to answer the question
you know can you create life from from
no life it's fascinating question and
may have many future uses
but it seems to be right now more of a a
kind of
medical curios sorry not MediCal
scientific curiosity
um rather than a than a purpose-driven
experiment there's nothing wrong with
scientific curiosity driven experiments
lots of people do them I give examples
of people who do them but it's it's a
different kind of question
um and so so I think you know I think
lots of people are trying
to make self-duplicating molecules to
make splitting membranes to make those
self-duplicating molecules carry
information
that would potentially uh create
metabolism
of of the of a very basic sort uh you
know using
basic
nutrients
to make more complex molecules so I
think all those questions are absolutely
fascinating
um
but on the other hand there's also so
much to do with engineering life that
already exists and using new genetic
material and inserting new genetic
material into it changing the genetic
material completely
that that is also equally interesting
and perhaps more
short applicable in the short term
well I think I said it was pleasure my
pleasure
thank you all for coming
[Applause]